There are a limited number of projects
a company can take on at any given time.
Executive management must decide what projects to prioritize
and how to use company resources most effectively.
A business case is the key document used
for making these kinds of decisions.
It establishes the purpose of a project
and weighs the project's benefits and costs.
A business case argues why a project is needed
and ideally, it describes how a project
solves a problem for the business.
It's an important step in making sure a project
is a profitable use of business resources.
But how do you write one?
Let's break down the seven steps
for developing a strong business case.
A business case should begin with an executive summary.
An executive summary is
a high-level overview of the project.
It summarizes the most important takeaways
of everything that follows in the business case.
That's why some people find it helpful
to write the executive summary last.
Since an executive summary is a high-level overview
of everything that follows,
let's review the other components of a business case.
The next section of a business case
is the problem statement.
The problem statement is a short description
of the business problem that the project solves.
Or sometimes it might actually be an opportunity
that the project is designed to capitalize on.
Your problem statement doesn't need
to be long or complicated.
The problem should be specific
and significant to the company's interest or needs.
Third, is to give possible solutions.
Provide executive management with a list of
alternative solutions to the problem statement.
This will demonstrate that you've considered
all of the options.
In the next section, you'll outline the proposed solution,
which is the project itself.
Now you're ready to describe the proposed project
and persuade executive management of it's benefits.
What is your proposed solution?
What are the expected outcomes?
And why is this option better than the others?
Provide a clear description of the project
you're suggesting, followed by both the qualitative
and quantitative benefits it offers for the business.
For example, you might predict an increase
in conversion rates by 13% but you also might explain
how the project will position your company
as an expert in the industry.
While you need to present your project's benefits,
you also need to be transparent when identifying
the project's risk and limitations.
Develop an outline of risks or possible threats
to the project's success.
You'll make a stronger business case
and foster confidence to an executive management
if you also include strategies for mitigating them.
So far you've established the project need
and proposed a solution.
Next, it's time to talk about the project logistics.
This means you need to breakdown
project costs and timelines.
Note that you aren't expected to know exactly
what a project will cost
or exactly how long a project will take.
However, you should do your research
and know enough to make a close estimation.
Executive management needs to know relatively
how much your project will cost
and how much time it will take to make an informed decision.
The final section of the business case
is a preliminary project plan
This is an overview of the project's key milestones,
workflow, scope, and resources.
Again, while you don't need to know every task involved
in executing a project,
you do need to highlight the key project milestones
and the general boundaries of the project.
What is or isn't included in the project deliverables.
So, there you have it.
Those are the seven main components
of an effective business case.
An executive summary, problem statement,
alternative options, an overview of your project
and it's benefits, project risks, cost,
and timeline, and a preliminary project plan.
Make your business case thorough, accurate,
and focused on solving a problem.
Not only will it increase your chances
of getting your project approved
but it will also do the legwork for
the project planning phase once you get the green light.